Let's talk about how Google Analytics reports direct traffic for a moment.
Direct is an actual default channel grouping in Google Analytics,
but let's understand how it is really a channel of last resort.
Only if no referring data is present on the inbound session and
no campaign data is associated with the user
that is within the campaign exploration window,
only in that case will the traffic be countered as direct.
Let's take a look at a couple of examples to see how that actually
plays out from a data capture standpoint and reporting.
In this first example,
looking at one user's journey,
we're going to look at the time lag between sessions,
the source medium, the way a session will get attributed,
and then whether or not it would be considered a direct session.
So, let's take a look here.
Session one comes in with the source medium Google CPC.
It gets paid such as the attributed channel for that session,
and if you were to add the direct sessions dimension to a report,
you would see the value was no.
Thirty days later, that same user comes back to the website through a bookmark link,
with no source medium data present.
This session again would get attributed to paid search.
It's within the campaign exploration window,
and you can see it, would get direct session flag as yes.
Sixty days the user comes back on that same bookmark link,
no source no medium value present for the session.
Again, the session would be attributed to
paid search and the direct session flag would be yes.
Ninety days later, the user comes back,
the sources facebook.com and the medium is referral.
This was from an untagged link on someone's personal Facebook post.
So, that session would actually be attributed to referral.
In this case, we have new referral information
and it will overwrite the existing cookie value,
and we will get an attribution to the Facebook referral source.
Let's take a look at a second example with
a little bit longer time windows and slightly different user journey.
Session one on day one,
we have no source, no medium data.
It gets captured in the direct channel,
as a true direct session.
Thirty days later, they click on a paid search ad,
so they come in with Google CPC.
The session gets credited with paid search,
and the direct session flag would be no.
Eight months later, they returned to the site directly,
source medium is none.
Because it's outside the six-month campaign exploration window,
again this is going to be a direct session.
Ninety days later, the user comes in from a facebook.com referral.
The medium is referral.
In that case, it gets written as referral and Google Analytics.
It is a referral session.
It is not a direct session.
Thirty days later that person comes back to the site,
directly from an untagged link,
none for source, none for medium,
referral will get credit and direct session will be yes.
Hopefully, this gives you a better understanding of
how direct traffic is actually captured in Google Analytics and why.